# Bachelorarbeit - Analyse der Diversifikation im Bankensektor als Ursache systemischer Risiken

This is the LaTeX source code of my diploma thesis that I wrote back in 2017 at
TU Berlin. The topic is _Analyse der Diversifikation im Bankensektor als Ursache
systemischer Risiken_. However, the thesis is only available in German (sorry
for the inconvenience). The document can be build with
[latexmk](https://ctan.org/pkg/latexmk).

In case you want to cite the document, please use the following BibTex entry:

```
@thesis{busse2017bachelor,
    title  = {Analyse der Diversifikation im Bankensektor als Ursache systemischer Risiken},
    author = {Anselm Busse},
    school = {Technische Universit\"at Berlin, Germany},
    type   = {Bachelor's Thesis},
    year   = 2017,
    month  = oct
}
```

---

Systemic crises are a great threat to every economy. Hence, it is inevitable to
analyse the risks that lead to such a crisis. If several or all banks go
bankrupt simultaneously, a systemic crisis might emerge. Even though
diversification may minimize the risk of going bankrupt for single banks, it can
also increase the chance of a systemic crisis. _Wolf Wagner_ discusses this
problem in detail in his paper _Diversification at Financial Institutions and
Systemic Crises_.

This thesis aims at presenting Wagner’s findings elaborately. Using a two
financial institutions model, I will explain how and to what extent
diversification is able to decrease the individual risk of a bank, yet at the
same time increases the risk of a systemic crisis. Wagner concludes that a total
diversification is not the best solution for this reason and furthermore
quantifies the optimum grade of diversification for concrete examples.

Wagner’s work will be analysed critically with regard to three aspects. First, I
will analyse the parameters that Wagner has not considered, hence completing the
analysis of his model. Second, the critical examination will show that Wagner’s
model is also applicable to probability distributions that are more complex. The
discussion will focus especially on problems that emerge from the use of
sectionally defined functions describing probability distributions. Third and
last, the financial market will be examined numerically. This examination will
confirm Wagner’s conclusions and results.

---

Systemische Krisen stellen eine substantielle Gefahr für jede Volkswirtschaft
dar. Aus diesem Grund ist die Untersuchung der Risiken, die zu solch einer Krise
führen, unabdingbar. Auslöser einer systemischen Krise kann die gleichzeitige
Insolvenz aller oder mehrerer Banken sein. Obwohl Diversifizierung das
individuelle Risiko einer Bank bezüglich einer Insolvenz verringern kann, kann
diese Diversifizierung das Risiko einer systemischen Krise vergrößern. Diese
Problematik wird in der Veröffentlichung von _Wolf Wagner_ mit dem Titel
_Diversification at Financial Institutions and Systemic Crises_ detailliert
diskutiert.

Die vorliegende Arbeit stellt die Erkenntnisse von Wagner ausführlich dar. Es
wird dabei anhand eines 2-Banken-Modells erläutert, wie und in welchem Ausmaß
Diversifikation zwar das individuelle Risiko einer Bank verringern kann,
gleichzeitig jedoch das Risiko einer systemischen Krise steigert. Wagner kommt
zu dem Schluss, dass eine vollständige Diversifikation aus diesem Grund nicht
optimal sein kann und quantifiziert den optimalen Diversifizierungsgrad für
konkrete Beispiele. Er kommt dabei zu der Erkenntnis, dass ohne eine Regulierung
im Bankensektor ein zu hoher Diversifizierungsgrad präferiert wird.

Wagners Ausarbeitung wird im Rahmen dieser Arbeit in drei Aspekten kritisch
hinterfragt. Zunächst werden Modellparameter untersucht, die bei Wagner keine
Rücksicht fanden. Dadurch wird seine Modellanalyse komplettiert. Als zweiter
Aspekt der kritischen Untersuchung wird gezeigt, dass Wagners Modell auch auf
komplexere Wahrscheinlichkeitsverteilungen angewandt werden kann. Dabei werden
insbesondere etwaige Probleme diskutiert, die bei der Nutzung von
abschnittsweise definierten Verteilungsfunktionen entstehen. Schlussendlich
findet im Rahmen dieser Arbeit eine numerische Analyse eines Bankenmarktes
statt. Durch die Analyse werden Wagners Aussagen und Ergebnisse weiter
untermauert.
